---
title: "Using clangd for PostgreSQL development"
comments: true
tags:
- clang
- meson
- postgresql
---

I have started using clangd (with a "d") for PostgreSQL development.
Maybe you want to try it too.

## Introduction

What is clangd?  To quote directly from the [web
site](https://clangd.llvm.org/):

> clangd understands your C++ code and adds smart features to your
> editor: code completion, compile errors, go-to-definition and more.
>
> clangd is a language server that can work with many editors via a
> plugin.

(They talk about C++, but this applies to C equally.)

Of course, editors can already do this.  But previous solutions
usually involved a hodgepodge of third-party tools that analyze source
files with varying amounts of awareness about what the source code
means.  The classics are ctags and etags, many people like to use
GLIMPSE, I have [written about GNU Global before]({% post_url
2016-07-20-using-gnu-global-with-postgresql %}).  By contrast, clangd
is based on an actual compiler tool chain, so clangd understands your
code _exactly_ like a compiler would.

I'm going to describe using Emacs and clangd.  If you are using Emacs
as well, you can follow along directly.  If not, maybe you can use
this as inspiration to set it up for your editor, and then share the
experience.  See also the clangd documentation for [editor
integration](https://clangd.llvm.org/installation#editor-plugins).

The quote above describes clangd as a "language server".  This refers
to the Language Server Protocol (LSP).  Let's quote from their [web
site](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/) now:

> The Language Server Protocol (LSP) defines the protocol used between
> an editor or IDE and a language server that provides language
> features like auto complete, go to definition, find all references
> etc.

Sounds good!

To be clear, the LSP isn't technically necessary to achieve this.
This kind of thing was certainly possible earlier.  But the setup was
usually more complicated, and each combination of editor and language
had to be created and maintained and configured separately.  The LSP
has allowed this ecosystem to arise where different editors and
different languages can communicate with each other through a common
interface.

Also, these language "servers" are servers in the sense that they
provide a service, but they are not (necessarily) long-running
processes.  They are processes called by the editor (the client) as
necessary, they are not started separately.

## Setup

Now let's look at the actual setup.  What you need:

- [GNU Emacs version
  29](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual///html_node/efaq/New-in-Emacs-29.html)
  ([released in July
  2023](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2023-07/msg00879.html)).
  This version includes LSP support by default.  The package that
  provides LSP support for Emacs is called
  [Eglot](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/index.html);
  it's also available for older Emacs versions as a separately
  installable package.  But let's go with the one where it's built in.

- [clangd](https://clangd.llvm.org/).  This is part of
  [LLVM](https://llvm.org/) and should be available from your package
  manager.  (For example, on Ubuntu, it's in a package called
  `clangd`.)

  (When using clangd to support your editor, you don't necessarily
  need to use clang for the actual compilation of the project, but it
  could help; see below.)

- You need to use Meson for building PostgreSQL.  This reason for that
  is as follows.  clangd needs to know how to compile each source
  file, to be able to show warnings etc.  By default, it will assume
  `clang filename.c`, but that usually won't work because it won't
  know about all the include paths, warning options, and other
  compiler options.  This is where previous, more simplistic editor
  integrations usually failed to the point of uselessness.  The
  solution is that Meson produces a file `compile_commands.json` that
  records the compile command for each source file.  This is also
  called a compilation database.  This is another
  [standard](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html)
  that different build systems know about.  For PostgreSQL, you only
  get that if using Meson.  (Actually, you don't need to use Meson for
  building PostgreSQL.  You just need to run `meson setup` to create
  the compilation database.)

- The default configuration of clangd assumes the build directory is
  called "build".  So it's sensible to stick with that, but you can
  configure things differently if you want to.

- One possible source of trouble is: Since `compile_commands.json` is
  used by clangd, the commands need to be understandable by the
  clang/LLVM universe.  If you use a different compiler, then the
  commands might contain options that clang doesn't understand, and
  then the whole thing will fail.  So at least to get started, I
  recommend building with clang, and better even with the clang
  version that matches the clangd version.  When that works, then you
  can branch out and try other combinations.  (In theory, the GCC
  project could also provide a language server that is based on the
  GCC backend, which would address this issue from their end, but that
  doesn't exist at the moment.)

Now let's open a file in Emacs with the default configuration (just to
show that it works out of the box â€” of course you can keep using your
existing configuration):

	emacs -Q src/backend/commands/tablecmds.c

Eglot isn't enabled by default, so manually enable it for the buffer:

	M-x eglot

On the first run, this will do some indexing work, which could take
about a minute.  The indexing work is cached in `.cache/clangd/` under
the top-level directory of the source tree.  (Maybe have Git ignore
that somehow?)  Note that this indexes the whole project, not just one
file.  (Emacs is aware of what set of files constitutes a "project"
based on where the `.git/` directory is.  See also the
[documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/Eglot-and-Buffers.html).)

If you like using this, then of course you will want to have it
activate automatically.  See the [Eglot
documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/Starting-Eglot.html)
and the [clangd
documentation](https://clangd.llvm.org/installation#editor-plugins) for
some ways to do this.

## Using

Now what can you do with this?  Let's look at some pictures.

Just parking the cursor on a symbol shows you the definition of the symbol:

![Eglot hover screenshot](/assets/eglot1.png)

See how it also shows the documentation comment for the symbol.  This
doesn't require any special formatting for the comment, as far as I
can tell.

![Eglot symbol documentation screenshot](/assets/eglot2.png)

You can jump to the definition of a symbol using `M-.` as usual.

Compilation of the file is done continuously in the background as it
is edited, and errors are highlighted:

![Eglot flymake screenshot](/assets/eglot3.png)

`M-x completion-at-point` works, of course:

![Eglot completion screenshot](/assets/eglot4.png)

Some features may only be available with newer clangd versions.
Consider this demonry, which required a newer version than was
standard on my system:

![Eglot inlay hints screenshot](/assets/eglot5.png)

Do you see it?  These are called [inlay
hints](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/Eglot-Commands.html#index-inlay-hints),
a perfect feature to either love or hate!  (Toggle with `M-x
eglot-inlay-hints-mode`.)

Some functionality doesn't quite work (yet?).  For example,
`eglot-rename` will indeed correctly rename symbols across the source
tree, but it will not update any mentions in comments.  `eglot-format`
doesn't work for PostgreSQL, because it relies on `clang-tidy`.  But
it's probably a good option for smaller projects with simpler
formatting requirements.  Also, when editing header files in the
PostgreSQL source tree, the syntax checking doesn't work right,
because the header files are not in the compilation database.  All of
this is very configurable and still evolving, so some of these issues
might get solved in the future or already have workarounds.

## Summary

So, this seems a lot better than previous solutions to make editors
aware of source code semantics.  With Meson providing the compilation
database, this is ready to go.  And it works pretty much out of the
box.

Thanks to fellow PostgreSQL contributor Peter Geoghegan for suggesting
that I try out clangd.
